# pdf-text-quality

Tools for evaluating the quality of the text layer in PDFs.

## Background

Pages in PDF files which have been created from bitmap images rather than being
created from a digital source (eg. by rendering a Word or LaTeX document to a
PDF) typically combine the input bitmaps, as background graphics, with hidden
PDF text drawing commands overlaid on top. The hidden text enables text
selection to work.

If the words in the hidden text layer are not well aligned with the visible text
in the bitmap image, or if the characters were mis-recognized, text selection
will be difficult, or produce incorrect results when text is copied.

Poor text layers present a problem for text-centric annotation tools like
[Hypothesis](https://web.hypothes.is). Detecting low-quality text layers can
be used as part of manual or automated processes to re-OCR affected pages
using a more modern/better-configured OCR tool.

## Installation

1. Install [Pipenv](https://pipenv.pypa.io/en/latest/)

2. Install [Tesseract](https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract) and
   [Poppler](https://poppler.freedesktop.org) utilities.

   On macOS, these can be installed via Homebrew:

   ```
   brew install poppler tesseract
   ```

   On Linux, using apt:

   ```
   sudo apt-get install poppler-utils tesseract-ocr
   ```

   After this step, `pdftotext`, `pdftocairo` and `tesseract` binaries should
   be available on your system.

3. Clone this repository and install Python dependencies with:

   ```
   pipenv install --dev
   ```

## Usage

```
pipenv run check-pdf [args] <pdf_file>
```

This will check all pages in `pdf_file`. The range of pages to check can be
adjusted using the `--first-page` and `--last-page` options.

For each checked page, a set of metrics is displayed. For example:

```shellsession
$ pipenv run check-pdf test-data/implementing-quicksort.pdf --first-page=1 --last-page=5

Checking text pages 1 to 5
Page 1 IoU: iou: 0.73, iou_x: 0.96, iou_y: 0.76, iou_weighted: 0.90
Page 2 IoU: iou: 0.19, iou_x: 0.33, iou_y: 0.41, iou_weighted: 0.35
Page 3 IoU: iou: 0.65, iou_x: 0.89, iou_y: 0.70, iou_weighted: 0.83
Page 4 IoU: iou: 0.65, iou_x: 0.90, iou_y: 0.70, iou_weighted: 0.84
Page 5 IoU: iou: 0.64, iou_x: 0.86, iou_y: 0.72, iou_weighted: 0.82
```

The `iou_weighted` metric is the main indicator to look at. "iou" stands for
[Intersection over Union](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaccard_index) and
indicates how well bounding boxes for words in the text layer match up to text
found in the page image via OCR. Values above 0.7 are generally "good", values
from 0.5-0.7 are "fair" and values below 0.5 are poor.

In the above example, most pages have a "good" text layer, but page 2 does not.
The quality of pages within a PDF can vary because they have been generated by
different means, or because certain aspects of a particular page affected the
text layer construction. For example, a page that was skewed when placed in
the scanner may have OCR-ed poorly when originally processed.

For contrast, here is the output from a PDF file which has a digitally created
cover page, with an accurate text layer, followed by a series of badly OCR-ed
pages with poor text layers:

```shellsession
$ pipenv run check-pdf bad-file.pdf

Checking text pages 1 to 5
Page 1 IoU: iou: 0.54, iou_x: 0.91, iou_y: 0.57, iou_weighted: 0.81
Page 2 IoU: iou: 0.20, iou_x: 0.41, iou_y: 0.36, iou_weighted: 0.39
Page 3 IoU: iou: 0.17, iou_x: 0.31, iou_y: 0.28, iou_weighted: 0.30
Page 4 IoU: iou: 0.19, iou_x: 0.36, iou_y: 0.31, iou_weighted: 0.35
Page 5 IoU: iou: 0.20, iou_x: 0.40, iou_y: 0.34, iou_weighted: 0.38
```

To see the full set of options, run:

```
pipenv run check-pdf --help
```
